---
status: new
---

So far you have learned about the standard steps. These should cover most of the cases. However, there are some other steps worth mentioning.

## Export steps

Sometimes we want to perform an action instead of creating a dataset. For instance, we might want to create a TSV file for an explorer, commit a CSV to a GitHub repository, or create a config for a multi-dimensional indicator. This is where the `Export` step comes in.

Export steps are used to perform an action on an already created dataset. This action typically implies making the data available to other parts of the system. There are different types of export steps:

- **Explorers**: Create a TSV file for a data explorer.
- **Multi-dimensional indicators**: Create a configuration for a multi-dimensional indicator.
- **Export to GitHub**: Commit a dataset to a GitHub repository.

Export steps should be used after the data has been processed and is ready to be used (post-Garden).

!!! note "Learn more about [export steps](../../guides/data-work/export-data.md)"

### Explorers

Data explorers are Grapher charts expanded with additional functionalities to facilitate exploration, such as dynamic entity filters or customizable menus. They are usually powered by indicators from OWID's Grapher database.

!!! info "Learn more about creating Data explorers [on Notion :octicons-arrow-right-24:](https://www.notion.so/owid/Creating-Data-Explorers-cf47a5ef90f14c1fba8fc243aba79be7)."

!!! note "Legacy explorers"

    In the past Explorers were manually defined from our Admin. Data was sourced by CSV files generated by ETL [served from S3](https://dash.cloudflare.com/078fcdfed9955087315dd86792e71a7e/r2/default/buckets/owid-catalog), or on GitHub.

    We have slowly transitioned into a new system where explorers are generated from the ETL pipeline. This is a more scalable and maintainable solution.

## Backport

Datasets from our production grapher database can be backported to ETL catalog.

These is useful when a dataset was imported to Grapher not by using the ETL (years ago, or manually imported datasets through the admin) and we want to make it available in ETL.

```mermaid
flowchart LR

    garden1((____)):::node -->|format| grapher1((____)):::node
    grapher1((____)):::node -->|load| grapher2a((____)):::node
    grapher2b((____)):::node -.->|backport| garden1((____)):::node


    subgraph id3 [Garden]
    garden1
    end

    subgraph id4 [Grapher]
    grapher1
    end

    subgraph id5 [Grapher]
    grapher2a
    grapher2b
    end

    subgraph id [ETL]
    id3
    id4
    end

    classDef node fill:#002147,color:#002147
    classDef node_ss fill:#002147,color:#fff
```


## ETag

A step used to mark dependencies on HTTPS resources. The path is interpreted as an HTTPS url, and a HEAD request is made against the URL and checked for its `ETag`. This can be used to trigger a rebuild each time the resource changes.

!!! warning "This step is rarely used"

    Currently it is only used to import some COVID-19 data, which is published by us in another project.

    ```yaml title="dag/health.yml"
    data://garden/owid/latest/covid:
    - etag://raw.githubusercontent.com/owid/covid-19-data/master/public/data/owid-covid-data.csv
    ```

## GitHub

An empty step used only to mark a dependency on a Github repo, and trigger a rebuild of later steps whenever that repo changes. This is useful since Github is a good store for data that updates too frequently to be snapshotted into Walden, e.g. Gapminder's [open-numbers](https://github.com/open-numbers/).

The most recent commit hash of the given branch will be used to determine whether the data has been updated. This way, the ETL will be triggered to rebuild any downstream steps each time the data is changed.

!!! example

    ```yaml title="dag/open_numbers.yml"
    data://open_numbers/open_numbers/latest/bp__energy:
    - github://open-numbers/ddf--bp--energy
    ```

!!! note

    Github rate-limits unauthorized API requests to 60 per hour, so we should be sparing with the use of this step as it is implemented today.

## Private steps

!!! tip "[Learn more about private steps](../../guides/private-import.md)"

In some cases, a source or publisher does not allow for re-publication of their data. When that happends, but we still want to use their data in ETL, we use _private steps_.

Private steps work the same way as regular steps and are the only difference is that the data from these steps is not made available in our catalog and APIs.

In the [DAG](../../design/dag.md), these steps appear with the prefix `data-private://`.

!!! example

    The garden step for the "Drug Use Disorders - Global Burden of Disease Study 2019 (GBD 2019)" dataset by the IHME is private. Their URI looks like:
    ```
    data-private://garden/ihme_gbd/2023-03-29/gbd_drug_disorders
    ```
